Create COMPILING.md (#1446)
jamulussoftware/jamulus: COMPILING.md

Jamulus can be compiled for Linux, Windows and macOS as follows. Note also the contributed [installation scripts](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/installscripts) for use unattended installs. There are also reports from people who successfully compile and run Jamulus on BSDs.

---

## Download sources

For .tar.gz [use this link](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/archive/latest.tar.gz) to download the latest release

For .zip [use this link](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/archive/master.zip)

## Linux

#### Install dependencies

On Ubuntu-based distributions 18.04+, Debian 9+ or 10 and Raspberry Pi Raspbian Buster release or later:

* build-essential
* qt5-qmake
* qtdeclarative5-dev
* qt5-default
* qttools5-dev-tools
* libjack-jackd2-dev

#### On Fedora

* qt5-qtdeclarative-devel
* jack-audio-connection-kit-dbus
* libqt5concurrent5
* jack-audio-connection-kit-devel

#### For all desktop distributions

[QjackCtl](https://qjackctl.sourceforge.io/) is optional, but recommended to configure JACK.

### Standard desktop build

> ```

Reviewer: I always do this:
```
make distclean ;# makes absolutely sure nothing is lurking anywhere -- or should
qmake ;# "Jamulus.pro" is redundant
make
# If you want to install, go ahead... but you don't need to
```

Jamulus can be compiled for Linux, Windows and macOS as follows. Note also the contributed [installation scripts](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/installscripts) for use unattended installs. There are also reports from people who successfully compile and run Jamulus on BSDs.

> Android and iOS are not officially supported, therefore there are no instructions yet.

Reviewer: Android build can be seen in the automation scripts, of course.

Indeed, all the build instructions for all supported platforms could be inferred from the automation scripts...

**Users of Raspberry Pi** You may want to compile the client on another machine and run the binary on the Raspberry Pi. In which case the only libraries you need to run it are those for a [headless server](Server-Linux#running-a-headless-server) build, but _with_ the JACK sound packages. 

### “Headless” server build

Although not strictly necessary, we recommend using the headless flag to speed up the build process. Gentoo users may also be able to avoid installing some dependencies as a consequence. Compiling with the headless flag means you can avoid installing some of the dependent packages, save some disk space and/or speed up your build time. 

Note that you don’t need to install the JACK package(s) for a headless build. If you plan to run headless on Gentoo, or are compiling under Ubuntu for use on another Ubuntu machine, the only packages you should need for a headless build are `qtcore`, `qtnetwork`, `qtconcurrent` and `qtxml` (both for building and running the server).

Compile the sources to ignore the JACK sound library:

```

> make distclean ;# reccommended

Reviewer: single "c": `recommended`

1. Open PowerShell
1. Navigate to the `jamulus` directory
1. To allow unsigned scripts, right-click on the `windows\deploy_windows.ps1` script, select properties and allow the execution of this script. You can also run `Set-ExecutionPolicy -ExecutionPolicy RemoteSigned -Scope CurrentUser`. (You can revert this after having run this script. For more information see the [Microsoft PowerShell documentation page](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.security/set-executionpolicy)).
1. Edit the $QtCompile32 and $QtCompile64 variables.
1. Run the Jamulus compilation and installer script in PowerShell: `.\windows\deploy_windows.ps1`.
1. You can now find the Jamulus installer in the `.\deploy` directory.

### Compiling only

1. Create a folder under `\windows` called ASIOSDK2
1. Download the [ASIOSDK](https://www.steinberg.net/asiosdk), open the top level folder in the .zip file and copy the contents into `[\path\to\jamulus\source]\windows\ASIOSDK2` so that, e.g., the folder `[\path\to\jamulus\source]\windows\ASIOSDK2\common` exists
1. Open Jamulus.pro in Qt Creator, configure the project with a default kit, then compile & run

---

> ## macOS

Reviewer: Have you checked this section against the Github automation scripts?

Author: No, but can/should we just refer people to the build scripts for all this stuff? I'd rather not maintain stuff in two places. Or is it not as simple as that?

Reviewer: That's the top level.

In fact, for all platforms for which we _have_ autobuilds, `COMPILING.md` should be redundant.  (I could fork and generate builds on github whenever I want using the autobuilds, if I was a new developer, for example.)  We should make it quite clear for those platforms that the autobuild process is the preferred method of generating the binaries.

It should really only be for platforms we do not do autobuilds for that this document becomes the normal process.

And ideally, as we become aware of demand on a platform, we should introduce autobuild support (subject to Github-compatible provision being available).

Author: > We should make it quite clear for those platforms that the autobuild process is the preferred method of generating the binaries.

So is a just a one-liner at the start? _"Please note that for supported platforms, the autobuild process in the Jamulus Github repository is the preferred method of generating binaries"_?

Reviewer: More that "the binaries generated by the autobuild process in the Jamulus repository are the preferred method of supporting these platforms".  There should be no benefit doing it any other way.  If there is, we should get to hear about it and see whether the autobuild process needs changing.

Author: Oh OK, so in effect saying that unless you're compiling for an unsupported platform, you're better off using the binaries instead of compiling. Does that need saying? I suppose it can't do any harm :-)

Jamulus can be compiled for Linux, Windows and macOS as follows. Note also the contributed [installation scripts](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/installscripts) for use unattended installs. There are also reports from people who successfully compile and run Jamulus on BSDs.

---

## Download sources

For .tar.gz [use this link](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/archive/latest.tar.gz) to download the latest release

For .zip [use this link](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/archive/master.zip)

## Linux

#### Install dependencies

On Ubuntu-based distributions 18.04+, Debian 9+ or 10 and Raspberry Pi Raspbian Buster release or later:

> 

Author: Because we assume that people who are compiling from source know about that.

> 

Reviewer: If we don't know the package manager, we don't know the package names, either.

* build-essential
* qt5-qmake
* qtdeclarative5-dev
* qt5-default
* qttools5-dev-tools
* libjack-jackd2-dev

#### On Fedora

* qt5-qtdeclarative-devel
* jack-audio-connection-kit-dbus
* libqt5concurrent5
* jack-audio-connection-kit-devel

#### For all desktop distributions

[QjackCtl](https://qjackctl.sourceforge.io/) is optional, but recommended to configure JACK.

> 

Author: Again, we assume that anyone who knows how to compile something will know how to get it (and we should't assume they want to install it in any particular way).

### Standard desktop build

```
make distclean
qmake
make
sudo make install
```

`make distclean` is optional but ensures a clean build environment. `make install` is optional and puts the Jamulus binary into `/usr/local/bin`.

**Users of Raspberry Pi** You may want to compile the client on another machine and run the binary on the Raspberry Pi. In which case the only libraries you need to run it are those for a [headless server](Server-Linux#running-a-headless-server) build, but _with_ the JACK sound packages. 

### “Headless” server build

> 

Reviewer 2: Just a random thought: Would you say that there are more people compiling headless for Linux since they're using a linux server? If that's the case, we might want to move it above the desktop build.

Author: Perhaps, but it would be a bit odd to assume this I think, since the people reading this will have chosen not to install binary files to use Jamulus. In the long run, I would expect this document to be read hardly ever at all :-)

Note that you don’t need to install the JACK package(s) for a headless build. If you plan to run headless on Gentoo, or are compiling under Ubuntu for use on another Ubuntu machine, the only packages you should need for a headless build are `qtcore`, `qtnetwork`, `qtconcurrent` and `qtxml` (both for building and running the server).

> Also, although not strictly necessary, we recommend using the headless flag to speed up the build process. Gentoo users may also be able to avoid installing some dependencies as a consequence. Compiling with the headless flag means you can avoid installing some of the dependent packages, save some disk space and/or speed up your build time. 

Reviewer 2: I think we should move line 55 right beyond the headline "Headless server build" to give an explanation why someone would like to have this.

1. To allow unsigned scripts, right-click on the `windows\deploy_windows.ps1` script, select properties and allow the execution of this script. You can also run `Set-ExecutionPolicy -ExecutionPolicy RemoteSigned -Scope CurrentUser`. (You can revert this after having run this script. For more information see the [Microsoft PowerShell documentation page](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.security/set-executionpolicy)).
1. Edit the $QtCompile32 and $QtCompile64 variables.
1. Run the Jamulus compilation and installer script in PowerShell: `.\windows\deploy_windows.ps1`.
1. You can now find the Jamulus installer in the `.\deploy` directory.

### Compiling only

1. Create a folder under `\windows` called ASIOSDK2
1. Download the [ASIOSDK](https://www.steinberg.net/asiosdk), open the top level folder in the .zip file and copy the contents into `[\path\to\jamulus\source]\windows\ASIOSDK2` so that, e.g., the folder `[\path\to\jamulus\source]\windows\ASIOSDK2\common` exists
1. Open Jamulus.pro in Qt Creator, configure the project with a default kit, then compile & run

---

## macOS
You will need XCode and Qt as follows:

> 

Reviewer: Sorry to be a pain on this... :)  If we're moving off `brew` for the automation, should we move off it here, too?  @softins 

(I was also thinking if we should recommend `aqtinstall` generally for installing Qt, so these instructions mirror the autobuild more closely.)

## Points to note

- Jamulus can be compiled for Linux, Windows and macOS. However, the preferred method of supporting these platforms is to use the binaries generated by the autobuild process in the Jamulus repository.
- For unattended installs, see the contributed [installation scripts](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/installscripts)
- There are reports from people who successfully compile and run Jamulus on BSDs.

> - Android and iOS are not officially supported, therefore there are no instructions yet.

Reviewer 2: iOS could be documented since it's not that difficult. @ngocdh

Reviewer 3: I don't know how to suggest a change here. Could you help? This is the text I prepared (credit @jeroenvv):

 - Make sure to install qt5 with the qt installer (not homebrew), and explicitly select iOS when choosing the Qt version
 - Run /path/to/qt/5.15.2/ios/bin/qmake -spec macx-xcode Jamulus.pro
 - Open the generated .xcodeproject in XCode, check the Signing & Capabilities and configure a team 
 - To run on a iOS device, build and run on the device, you'll have first trust your developer profile in device's Settings.

Author: Thanks - that's now in.

1. Edit the $QtCompile32 and $QtCompile64 variables.
1. Run the Jamulus compilation and installer script in PowerShell: `.\windows\deploy_windows.ps1`.
1. You can now find the Jamulus installer in the `.\deploy` directory.

### Compiling only

1. Create a folder under `\windows` called ASIOSDK2
1. Download the [ASIOSDK](https://www.steinberg.net/asiosdk), open the top level folder in the .zip file and copy the contents into `[\path\to\jamulus\source]\windows\ASIOSDK2` so that, e.g., the folder `[\path\to\jamulus\source]\windows\ASIOSDK2\common` exists
1. Open Jamulus.pro in Qt Creator, configure the project with a default kit, then compile & run

---

## macOS
You will need XCode and Qt as follows:

```
brew install qt5
brew link qt5 --force
```

### Generate XCode Project file

`qmake -spec macx-xcode Jamulus.pro`

### Print build targets and configuration in console

`xcodebuild -list -project Jamulus.xcodeproj`

will prompt

```
Targets:
    Jamulus
    Qt Preprocess

Build Configurations:
    Debug
    Release
```

If no build configuration is specified and `-scheme` is not passed then "Release" is used.

```
Schemes:
    Jamulus
```

### Build the project

`xcodebuild build`

> Will build the file and make it available in `./Release/Jamulus.app`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Will build the file and make it available in `./Release/Jamulus.app`
## iOS
* Make sure to install qt5 with the qt installer (not homebrew), and explicitly select iOS when choosing the Qt version
* Run /path/to/qt/5.15.2/ios/bin/qmake -spec macx-xcode Jamulus.pro
* Open the generated .xcodeproject in XCode, check the Signing & Capabilities and configure a team
* To run on a iOS device, build and run on the device, you'll have first trust your developer profile in device's Settings.
```

- For unattended installs, see the contributed [installation scripts](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/installscripts)
- There are reports from people who successfully compile and run Jamulus on BSDs.
- Android and iOS are not officially supported, therefore there are no instructions yet.

---

## Download sources

For .tar.gz [use this link](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/archive/latest.tar.gz) to download the latest release

For .zip [use this link](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/archive/master.zip)

## Linux

#### Install dependencies

On Ubuntu-based distributions 18.04+, Debian 9+ or 10 and Raspberry Pi Raspbian Buster release or later:

* build-essential
* qt5-qmake
* qtdeclarative5-dev
* qt5-default
* qttools5-dev-tools
* libjack-jackd2-dev

#### On Fedora

* qt5-qtdeclarative-devel
* jack-audio-connection-kit-dbus
* libqt5concurrent5 (qt5-linguist for Fedora 33)
* jack-audio-connection-kit-devel

#### For all desktop distributions

[QjackCtl](https://qjackctl.sourceforge.io/) is optional, but recommended to configure JACK.

### Standard desktop build

```
make distclean

> qmake ;# qmake-qt5 on Fedora 33

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
qmake # qmake-qt5 on Fedora 33
```

make
sudo make install
```

`make distclean` is optional but ensures a clean build environment. `make install` is optional and puts the Jamulus binary into `/usr/local/bin`.

> **Users of Raspberry Pi** You may want to compile the client on another machine and run the binary on the Raspberry Pi. In which case the only libraries you need to run it are those for a [headless server](Server-Linux#running-a-headless-server) build, but _with_ the JACK sound packages. 

Reviewer 4: I still don't understand why we need this and would suggest removing this paragraph.
We don't provide documentation for cross-compilation (yet?), so this suggestion makes little sense to me as I'd argue that most of the people are still mainly using x86_64 machines (maybe it'll change with Mac M1 which is at least ARM, but I'm not sure whether this is the same flavor (ARM version, 32/64bit, armhf).

Author: Yes, I think this was out of a desire to explain things to people inexperienced with compilation perhaps, not sure. I'll remove it as too noisy.

### “Headless” server build

> Although not strictly necessary, we recommend using the headless flag to speed up the build process. Gentoo users may also be able to avoid installing some dependencies as a consequence. Compiling with the headless flag means you can avoid installing some of the dependent packages, save some disk space and/or speed up your build time. 

Reviewer 4: Reduction of dependencies and build time speedup are mentioned twice, so this sounds a bit redundant and might be condensed into a single sentence?

```suggestion
Although not strictly necessary, we recommend using the headless flag to avoid having to install some of the dependent packages, save some disk space and/or speed up your build time. 
```

Also, although not strictly necessary, we recommend using the headless flag to speed up the build process. Gentoo users may also be able to avoid installing some dependencies as a consequence. Compiling with the headless flag means you can avoid installing some of the dependent packages, save some disk space and/or speed up your build time. 

Compile the sources to ignore the JACK sound library:

```
qmake "CONFIG+=nosound headless" Jamulus.pro

> make clean

Reviewer 4: `make clean` sounds unneeded.

> make distclean ;# reccommended

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
make distclean # recommended
```

make

> sudo make install ;# optional

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
sudo make install # optional
```

## Points to note

- Jamulus can be compiled for Linux, Windows and macOS. However, the preferred method of supporting these platforms is to use the binaries generated by the autobuild process in the Jamulus repository.
- For unattended installs, see the contributed [installation scripts](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/installscripts)
- There are reports from people who successfully compile and run Jamulus on BSDs.

> - Android and iOS are not officially supported, therefore there are no instructions yet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Android and iOS are not officially supported.
```

Jamulus can be compiled for Linux, Windows and macOS as follows. Alernatively, you may wish to use one of the contributed [installation scripts](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/installscripts). There are also reports from people who successfully compile and run Jamulus on BSDs.

---

## Download sources

For .tar.gz [use this link](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/archive/latest.tar.gz) to download the latest release

For .zip [use this link](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/archive/master.zip)

## Linux

#### Install dependencies

> On Ubuntu-based distributions 18.04+, Debian 9+ or 10 and Raspberry Pi Raspbian Buster release or later:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On Ubuntu-based distributions 18.04+, Debian 9+ or 10 and Raspberry Pi Raspbian Buster release or later you'll need:
```

Author: I'd prefer to keep this style of this document sparse.

* Build-essential
* Qt5-qmake
* Qtdeclarative5-dev
* Qt5-default
* Qttools5-dev-tools
* Libjack-jackd2-dev

#### On Fedora

* Qt5-qtdeclarative-devel
* Jack-audio-connection-kit-dbus
* libQt5Concurrent5
* Jack-audio-connection-kit-devel

#### For all desktop distributions

[QjackCtl](https://qjackctl.sourceforge.io/) is optional, but recommended to configure JACK.

### Standard desktop build

> ~~~

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```shell
```

qmake Jamulus.pro
make clean
make
sudo make install

> ~~~

Reviewer 2: ~~~suggestion
```
~~~

This puts the Jamulus binary into `/usr/local/bin`.

#### Notes

* The "make clean" command is essential to remove the automatically generated Qt files which are present in the .tar.gz file and may not match the Qt version you are using.

* To use an external shared OPUS library instead of the built-in one use qmake `"CONFIG+=opus_shared_lib" Jamulus.pro`.

* To use this file configure the software with `qmake "CONFIG+=noupcasename" Jamulus.pro` to make sure the output target name of this software is **j**amulus instead of **J**amulus.

* Users of Raspberry Pi: You may want to compile the client on another machine and run the binary on the Raspberry Pi. In which case the only libraries you need to run it are those for a [headless server](Server-Linux#running-a-headless-server) build, but _with_ the JACK sound packages. In particular, have a look at the footnote for the headless build.

* As of version 3.5.3, Jamulus is no longer compatible with Qt4.

> ### “Headless” server build

Reviewer 2: Do we link it in the documentation or is this no longer needed since we assume that everybody will use the amd64 .deb files?

Author: Sorry, link to what? The Qt4 thing? If so, then yes since I assume the .deb will sort out dependencies.

Reviewer 4: Yes, I think we can remove the Qt4 reference. We explicitly document the Qt5 requirement above.

Also, although not strictly necessary, we recommend using the headless flag to speed up the build process. Gentoo users may also be able to avoid installing some dependencies as a consequence. For more information [see footnote](#footnote).

Compile the sources to ignore the JACK sound library:

~~~
qmake "CONFIG+=nosound headless" Jamulus.pro
make clean
make
~~~

To control the server with systemd, see this [unit file example](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/blob/master/distributions/jamulus-server.service). See also runtime [configuration options](/wiki/Command-Line-Options), and [this information](/wiki/Tips-Tricks-More#controlling-recording-on-linux-headless-servers) on controlling recordings on headless servers.

### Notes

* Compiling with the headless flag means you can avoid installing some of the dependent packages, save some disk space and/or speed up your build time under the following circumstances:

* If you plan to run Jamulus on Gentoo Linux, the only packages you should need for a headless build are `qtcore`, `qtnetwork`, `qtconcurrent` and `qtxml` (both for building and running the server).

> * If you are running Jamulus on Ubuntu/Debian, you will need all dependent packages to compile the binary, but to run the resulting headless Jamulus server you should only need `libqt5core5a`, `libqt5network5`, `libqt5xml5` and probably `libqt5concurrent5`. This may be useful for compiling/upgrading on one machine to run the binary on another (a Raspberry Pi, for example).

Reviewer 2: I'd put this above to explain why headless might be better for some people.

Author: Is it me, or is it very hard to understand what it being commented on in this Github thing (what is "this" in your comment)? I thought we agreed to remove the second para.

Reviewer 2: By this I meant line 83. But never mind. Will do a new review now.

* Note that if you want to compile a GUI client on one machine and run it on another (e.g. a Raspberry Pi) you only need the dependencies listed for a headless server, only with the JACK sound libraries.

---

> ## Windows

Reviewer 2: Although I wrote some of this (especially the installer part), there have been some edits. I think we should verify if we really need all these steps.

Author: I believe it has been verified, hence this amend request that I incorporated: https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamuluswebsite/issues/382

> Jamulus can be compiled for Linux, Windows and macOS as follows. Alernatively, you may wish to use one of the contributed [installation scripts](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/installscripts).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Jamulus can be compiled for Linux, Windows and macOS as follows. Alernatively, you may wish to use one of the contributed [installation scripts](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/installscripts). There are also reports from people who successfully compile and run Jamulus on BSDs.
```

---

## Download sources

For .tar.gz [use this link](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/archive/latest.tar.gz) to download the latest release

For .zip [use this link](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/archive/master.zip)

## Linux

#### Install dependencies

On Ubuntu-based distributions 18.04+, Debian 9+ or 10 and Raspberry Pi Raspbian Buster release or later:

* Build-essential
* Qt5-qmake
* Qtdeclarative5-dev
* Qt5-default
* Qttools5-dev-tools
* Libjack-jackd2-dev

#### On Fedora

* Qt5-qtdeclarative-devel
* Jack-audio-connection-kit-dbus
* libQt5Concurrent5

> * Jack-audio-connection-kit-devel

Reviewer 4: Are you sure about the case here? I remember them to be lowercase and I think case is relevant? Haven't checked though.

Author: Oh I just tool what was there - maybe I upper cased some my mistake. I'll check..

Reviewer 2: Yep. Same for the Debian dependencies above. I hope one day we'll be able to compile Jamulus without all the GUI stuff (Qt Creator,...)

#### For all desktop distributions

[QjackCtl](https://qjackctl.sourceforge.io/) is optional, but recommended to configure JACK.

### Standard desktop build

~~~
qmake Jamulus.pro
make clean
make
sudo make install
~~~

This puts the Jamulus binary into `/usr/local/bin`.

#### Notes

> * The "make clean" command is essential to remove the automatically generated Qt files which are present in the .tar.gz file and may not match the Qt version you are using.

Reviewer 4: I wasn't aware of this. Should we work on fixing this in the tarballs?

Reviewer 2: Are they really in there? I didn't find any of them but make clean doesn't do any harm, I think.

Reviewer 4: I just checked. `make clean` doesn't even work. I suspect this might be a leftover from times where the tarballs had been created manually? I suggest removing this line altogether.

```
localhost tmp/jamulus-r3_7_0$ make clean
make: *** No rule to make target 'clean'.  Stop.
```

> * To use an external shared OPUS library instead of the built-in one use qmake `"CONFIG+=opus_shared_lib" Jamulus.pro`.

Reviewer 4: Is it worth documenting this?

This may mostly be relevant for packagers which aim to avoid bundled libraries in most cases. Packers usually know the build systems and will hopefully spot this option.

For other users this is mainly confusing, I think. I used to be a packager for Gentoo, so my first reaction to seeing this option was "cool, I'm going to use it" until I ran into issues because the latest (?) publicly available libopus has a bug which makes using it from Jamulus impossible, IIRC.

So it might be best to remove this altogether or document it as "for packagers only" and reference the need for a very recent/patched libopus?

Author: I'm all in favour of removing stuff that's not helpful to the majority. If a packager wants to know they can always ask.

Reviewer 2: Yep. I'd remove it then.

> * To use this file configure the software with `qmake "CONFIG+=noupcasename" Jamulus.pro` to make sure the output target name of this software is **j**amulus instead of **J**amulus.

Reviewer 4: What do you mean with "To use this file"?

I'm wondering if this is relevant to main stream users, I think this is rather a packaging/policy thing.

```suggestion
* The final binary will be called **J**amulus. If you prefer a lower case **j**amulus, configure the software with `qmake "CONFIG+=noupcasename" Jamulus.pro`.
```

Author: Maybe remove it as per the comment above?

> * Users of Raspberry Pi: You may want to compile the client on another machine and run the binary on the Raspberry Pi. In which case the only libraries you need to run it are those for a [headless server](Server-Linux#running-a-headless-server) build, but _with_ the JACK sound packages. In particular, have a look at the footnote for the headless build.

Reviewer 4: Hrm, this sounds a bit like "ok, I'm going to compile in my workstation and run the result on my Raspberry", which is not going to work due to the architecture mismatch. I don't think we provide cross-compiling instructions either.

Reviewer 2: Yes. That was initially intended because of the lack of .deb packages.

Author: Yes, I remember when this got written and it confused me I have to say. My understanding is that it would work if the distro (eg Ubuntu) was the same one each and all you wanted to do was save a few Kb and some build time on the Pi? Maybe @ann0see can clarify.

Reviewer 2: >  all you wanted to do was save a few Kb and some build time on the Pi?

The main issues were:

1. No .deb files for Linux ARM (this issue still exists)
2. No headless .deb files for a server --> I had to clutter it with a GUI to just produce the headless build.

Reviewer 4: > No .deb files for Linux ARM (this issue still exists)

Yes. I'll open an issue for that.

> Therefore I compiled the headless binary on my workstation and copied the binary to the server.

From your x86_64 workstation to a Raspberry server? I'm surprised that this can work?

Reviewer 2: No. From my x86_64 PC to my x86_64 server. These were two different use cases.

Reviewer 4: Ok, but then this ended up in a strange way in the docs. I read them as if it were possible to compile on my workstation and use the binary on my Raspberry. I think we should change or remove that.

Author: Can somebody verify that the notes for headless build are correct? It was referring to a non-existent "footnote" before which I think is [this in the original](https://jamulus.io/wiki/Compiling#the-headless-build-flag), but we agreed to remove some of it?

Reviewer 4: > Can somebody verify that the notes for headless build are correct?

Did that as part of my last review.

* As of version 3.5.3, Jamulus is no longer compatible with Qt4.

### “Headless” server build

Note that you don’t need to install the JACK package(s) for a headless build. If you plan to run headless on Gentoo, or are compiling under Ubuntu for use on another Ubuntu machine, see the footnote.

Also, although not strictly necessary, we recommend using the headless flag to speed up the build process. Gentoo users may also be able to avoid installing some dependencies as a consequence. For more information [see footnote](#footnote).

Compile the sources to ignore the JACK sound library:

~~~
qmake "CONFIG+=nosound headless" Jamulus.pro
make clean

> Make

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
make
```

Reviewer 2: Just committed it since I think it's a small thing.

~~~

To control the server with systemd, see this [unit file example](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/blob/master/distributions/jamulus-server.service). See also runtime [configuration options](/wiki/Command-Line-Options), and [this information](/wiki/Tips-Tricks-More#controlling-recording-on-linux-headless-servers) on controlling recordings on headless servers.

### Notes

* Compiling with the headless flag means you can avoid installing some of the dependent packages, save some disk space and/or speed up your build time under the following circumstances:

* If you plan to run Jamulus on Gentoo Linux, the only packages you should need for a headless build are `qtcore`, `qtnetwork`, `qtconcurrent` and `qtxml` (both for building and running the server).

* If you are running Jamulus on Ubuntu/Debian, you will need all dependent packages to compile the binary, but to run the resulting headless Jamulus server you should only need `libqt5core5a`, `libqt5network5`, `libqt5xml5` and probably `libqt5concurrent5`. This may be useful for compiling/upgrading on one machine to run the binary on another (a Raspberry Pi, for example).

> * Note that if you want to compile a GUI client on one machine and run it on another (e.g. a Raspberry Pi) you only need the dependencies listed for a headless server, only with the JACK sound libraries.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure why we focus so much on this scenario. Is this common?

Reviewer 2: It could have been before we provided the .deb files

Author: Yes, all this is from Jamulus BB (Before Binaries). So maybe just remove all this stuff?

Reviewer 2: Yep. I'd remove it.

---

## Windows

You will need [Qt](https://www.qt.io/download)

* Use the free GPLv2 license for Open Source development
* To determine the Qt version you need, check [qt-installer-windows.qs](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/blob/master/windows/qt-installer-windows.qs): under INSTALL_COMPONENTS you will see `qt.qt5.[version]`, e.g., 5123 means version 5.12.3.
* Select Components during installation: Expand the Qt section, find the matching version, e.g., **Qt 5.12.3**, and add the compiler components for your compiler, e.g., `MSVC 2017 32-bit/64-bit` for Visual Studio 2019
* [ASIO development files](https://www.steinberg.net/en/company/developer.html)

### Compiling and building installer

Most users will probably want to use this method:

1. Open PowerShell
1. Navigate to the `jamulus` directory

> 1. To allow unsigned scripts, right-click on the `windows\deploy_windows.ps1` script, select properties and allow the execution of this script. You can also run `Set-ExecutionPolicy -ExecutionPolicy RemoteSigned -Scope CurrentUser`. (You can revert this after having run this script. For more information see the [Microsoft PowerShell documentation page](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.security/set-executionpolicy)).

Reviewer 4: This seems to mix PowerShell (console) and Windows Explorer, doesn't it?

Author: I've not altered any of this since it went into the original. Not sure who wrote it in fact. Maybe @ann0see ?

Reviewer 2: Yes. I think I wrote it and somebody else edited it later. Not sure who it was. See my comment above.
